docs/build-the-docs.md, before:

# Building the Documentation

You're now ready to build (generate) the ownCloud documentation.
The documentation can be generated in HTML and PDF formats.

## Generating HTML Documentation

There are two ways to generate the documentation in HTML format:

- Using ownCloud's custom Antora Docker Container
- Running Antora from the Command-Line

### Using the Docker Container

To build the documentation using the Docker container, from the command line, in the root of the docs directory, run the following command:

```
docker run -ti --rm \
    -e DOCSEARCH_ENABLED=true \
    -e DOCSEARCH_ENGINE=lunr \
    -v $(pwd):/antora/ \
    -w /antora/ \
    owncloudci/antora:latest \
    --pull \
    --cache-dir /antora/cache/ \
    --redirect-facility static \
    --generator ./generators/search.js \
    --stacktrace \
    site.yml
```

This command:

- Starts up [ownCloud's custom Antora Docker container](https://hub.docker.com/r/owncloudci/antora/)
- Runs Antora's `generate` command, which regenerates the documentation
- You can add the `--clean` option to clean the build directory of any leftover artifacts from the previous build, including PDF's.

If all goes well, you will _not_ see any console output.
If a copy of the container doesn't exist locally, you can pull down a copy, by running `docker pull owncloudci/antora:latest`.
Otherwise, you should see output similar to the following:

```console
Unable to find image 'owncloudci/antora:latest' locally
latest: Pulling from owncloudci/antora
605ce1bd3f31: Already exists
0511902e1bcd: Downloading  5.347MB/19.61MB
343e34c41f87: Download complete
1e0ba8eb567c: Downloading  4.569MB/37.51MB
d5a49762c0f9: Download complete
```

### Using Make

This is the easiest way to build the documentation using predefined settings.

```
make html
```

### Using the Antora Tools On The Command-Line

If you want to use your own settings, run the command passing the necessary parameters manually, as in the example below.

**Note:** The environment variables at the beginning are required for building the docs with integrated site search.

```
DOCSEARCH_ENABLED=true DOCSEARCH_ENGINE=lunr antora --pull \
    --cache-dir ./cache/ \
    --redirect-facility static \
    --generator ./generators/search.js \
    --stacktrace \
    site.yml
```

- You can add the `--clean` option to clean the build directory of any leftover artifacts from the previous build, including PDF's.

### Update The Generated Search Index

The playbook file (`site.yml`) sets the `site.url` configuration directive to `http://localhost:5000`.
It's likely fair to assume that this isn't the domain where the documentation will be hosted.

Using `sed`, such as in the following example, from the root directory of the project should suffice.

```bash
#!/bin/bash
set -e
sed -i 's/localhost:5000/<hosted domain and port>/g' public/search_index.json
```

### Viewing The HTML Documentation

Assuming that there are no errors, the next thing to do is to view the result in your browser.
In case you have already installed a webserver, you need to make the html docmentation
available pointing to subdirectory `public`
or for easy handling use the [NPM Serve tool](https://www.npmjs.com/package/serve) so that you can view your changes,
before committing and pushing the changes to the remote docs repository.
You could also use [PHP's built-in webserver](https://secure.php.net/manual/en/features.commandline.webserver.php) as well.

The following example uses *Serve*, to start it run the following command in the root of your docs repository:

```
serve public &
```

This starts Serve and set it running in the background, using the `public` directory, (re)generated by `antora site.yml`, as the document root, listening on `http://localhost:5000`.
_The URL is automatically copied to the clipboard._

![Viewing the Antora docs with NPM serve](./images/viewing-the-antora-docs-with-npm-serve.png)

Open the URL in your browser of choice and you'll see two links, as below.

![Viewing the locally generated Antora documentation](./images/viewing-the-locally-generated-antora-documentation.png)

If you're happy with your changes, as with any other change, create a set of meaningful commits and push them to the remote repository.
If you're _not_ satisfied with the changes, however, continue to make further updates, as necessary, and run `antora site.yml` afterwards.
Your changes will be reflected in the local version of the site that Serve is rendering.

We hope that you can see that contributing to the documentation using Antora is a pretty straight-forward process, and not _that_ demanding.

## Generating PDF Documentation

To generate the documentation in PDF format, you need to have `asciidoctor-pdf` and GNU `make` installed, as PDF generation isn't, _yet_, supported by Antora.
To install asciidoctor-pdf, please refer to [the official installation instructions](https://asciidoctor.org/docs/asciidoctor-pdf/).
To install GNU Make, please refer to the link below for your operating system:

- [Linux](https://www.cyberciti.biz/faq/howto-installing-gnu-c-compiler-development-environment-on-ubuntu/)
- [macOS](http://brewformulas.org/Make)
- [Microsoft Windows](http://gnuwin32.sourceforge.net/install.html)

When installed, run the command below in the root directory of the repository, to generate PDF versions of the _administration_, _developer_ and _user_ manuals.

```console
make pdf
```

`make pdf` invokes [asciidoctor-pdf](https://github.com/asciidoctor/asciidoctor-pdf) and passes it:

1. **The configuration file to use**

    This configuration file, based on [the asciidoctor-pdf theming guide](https://github.com/asciidoctor/asciidoctor-pdf/blob/master/docs/theming-guide.adoc), contains all the essential details required to build a PDF version of one of the manuals.

    This includes the list of files to use as the PDF's source material as well as the required YAML front-matter. The front-matter includes details such as whether to render a table of contents, the icon set to use, and the images base directory.

2. **The custom theme directory and the custom theme file**

    This ensures that the defaults are overridden, where relevant, to ensure that the generated PDF is as close to the current ownCloud style as possible.

## Viewing Build Errors

If an aspect of your change contains invalid AsciiDoc, then you'll see output similar to the example below.

```console
asciidoctor: ERROR: index.adoc: line 25: only book doctypes can contain level 0 sections
```

There, you can see:

- That an error was found
- The file it was found in
- The line of that file where it is located

Commit message:

Add a local playbook
This commit provides a local playbook, that will build the three core
manuals, incorporating changes made in the local (GIT) working
directory. It also updates the docs so that users know that this option
is available.

docs/build-the-docs.md, after:

# Building the Documentation

You're now ready to build (generate) the ownCloud documentation.
The documentation can be generated in HTML and PDF formats.

## Generating HTML Documentation

There are two ways to generate the documentation in HTML format:

- Using ownCloud's custom Antora Docker Container
- Running Antora from the Command-Line

### Using the Docker Container

To build the documentation using the Docker container, from the command line, in the root of the docs directory, run the following command:

```
docker run -ti --rm \
    -e DOCSEARCH_ENABLED=true \
    -e DOCSEARCH_ENGINE=lunr \
    -v $(pwd):/antora/ \
    -w /antora/ \
    owncloudci/antora:latest \
    --pull \
    --cache-dir /antora/cache/ \
    --redirect-facility static \
    --generator ./generators/search.js \
    --stacktrace \
    site.yml
```

**Note:** Use `site.local.yml` instead of `site.yml` if you want to see any local changes.

This command:

- Starts up [ownCloud's custom Antora Docker container](https://hub.docker.com/r/owncloudci/antora/)
- Runs Antora's `generate` command, which regenerates the documentation
- You can add the `--clean` option to clean the build directory of any leftover artifacts from the previous build, including PDF's.

If all goes well, you will _not_ see any console output.
If a copy of the container doesn't exist locally, you can pull down a copy, by running `docker pull owncloudci/antora:latest`.
Otherwise, you should see output similar to the following:

```console
Unable to find image 'owncloudci/antora:latest' locally
latest: Pulling from owncloudci/antora
605ce1bd3f31: Already exists
0511902e1bcd: Downloading  5.347MB/19.61MB
343e34c41f87: Download complete
1e0ba8eb567c: Downloading  4.569MB/37.51MB
d5a49762c0f9: Download complete
```

### Using Make

Using Make, as in the example below, is the easiest way to build the documentation.
The Makefile has a predefined target (`html`) which calls Antora, supplying all of the required options to build the docs, to build the documentation on the master branch of [the ownCloud documentation repository](https://github.com/owncloud/docs).

```
make html
```

However, if you are making local changes in a development branch, you need to override the Antora Playbook (`site.yml`), which the `html` target uses by default.
To do this, set the `PLAYBOOK` environment variable as in the example below.
This tells Antora to use `site.local.yml` which builds the documentation based on the local Git working directory.

```console
make html PLAYBOOK=site.local.yml
```

### Using the Antora Tools On The Command-Line

If you want to use your own settings, run the command passing the necessary parameters manually, as in the example below.

**Note:** The environment variables at the beginning are required for building the docs with integrated site search.

```
DOCSEARCH_ENABLED=true DOCSEARCH_ENGINE=lunr antora --pull \
    --cache-dir ./cache/ \
    --redirect-facility static \
    --generator ./generators/search.js \
    --stacktrace \
    site.yml
```

**Note:** Use `site.local.yml` instead of `site.yml` if you want to see any local changes.

- You can add the `--clean` option to clean the build directory of any leftover artifacts from the previous build, including PDF's.

### Update The Generated Search Index

The playbook file (`site.yml`) sets the `site.url` configuration directive to `http://localhost:5000`.
It's likely fair to assume that this isn't the domain where the documentation will be hosted.

Using `sed`, such as in the following example, from the root directory of the project should suffice.

```bash
#!/bin/bash
set -e
sed -i 's/localhost:5000/<hosted domain and port>/g' public/search_index.json
```

### Viewing The HTML Documentation

Assuming that there are no errors, the next thing to do is to view the result in your browser.
In case you have already installed a webserver, you need to make the html docmentation
available pointing to subdirectory `public`
or for easy handling use the [NPM Serve tool](https://www.npmjs.com/package/serve) so that you can view your changes,
before committing and pushing the changes to the remote docs repository.
You could also use [PHP's built-in webserver](https://secure.php.net/manual/en/features.commandline.webserver.php) as well.

The following example uses *Serve*, to start it run the following command in the root of your docs repository:

```
serve public &
```

This starts Serve and set it running in the background, using the `public` directory, (re)generated by `antora site.yml`, as the document root, listening on `http://localhost:5000`.
_The URL is automatically copied to the clipboard._

![Viewing the Antora docs with NPM serve](./images/viewing-the-antora-docs-with-npm-serve.png)

Open the URL in your browser of choice and you'll see two links, as below.

![Viewing the locally generated Antora documentation](./images/viewing-the-locally-generated-antora-documentation.png)

If you're happy with your changes, as with any other change, create a set of meaningful commits and push them to the remote repository.
If you're _not_ satisfied with the changes, however, continue to make further updates, as necessary, and run `antora site.yml` afterwards.
Your changes will be reflected in the local version of the site that Serve is rendering.

We hope that you can see that contributing to the documentation using Antora is a pretty straight-forward process, and not _that_ demanding.

## Generating PDF Documentation

To generate the documentation in PDF format, you need to have `asciidoctor-pdf` and GNU `make` installed, as PDF generation isn't, _yet_, supported by Antora.
To install asciidoctor-pdf, please refer to [the official installation instructions](https://asciidoctor.org/docs/asciidoctor-pdf/).
To install GNU Make, please refer to the link below for your operating system:

- [Linux](https://www.cyberciti.biz/faq/howto-installing-gnu-c-compiler-development-environment-on-ubuntu/)
- [macOS](http://brewformulas.org/Make)
- [Microsoft Windows](http://gnuwin32.sourceforge.net/install.html)

When installed, run the command below in the root directory of the repository, to generate PDF versions of the _administration_, _developer_ and _user_ manuals.

```console
make pdf
```

`make pdf` invokes [asciidoctor-pdf](https://github.com/asciidoctor/asciidoctor-pdf) and passes it:

1. **The configuration file to use**

    This configuration file, based on [the asciidoctor-pdf theming guide](https://github.com/asciidoctor/asciidoctor-pdf/blob/master/docs/theming-guide.adoc), contains all the essential details required to build a PDF version of one of the manuals.

    This includes the list of files to use as the PDF's source material as well as the required YAML front-matter. The front-matter includes details such as whether to render a table of contents, the icon set to use, and the images base directory.

2. **The custom theme directory and the custom theme file**

    This ensures that the defaults are overridden, where relevant, to ensure that the generated PDF is as close to the current ownCloud style as possible.

## Viewing Build Errors

If an aspect of your change contains invalid AsciiDoc, then you'll see output similar to the example below.

```console
asciidoctor: ERROR: index.adoc: line 25: only book doctypes can contain level 0 sections
```

There, you can see:

- That an error was found
- The file it was found in
- The line of that file where it is located
